---
title: Money laundering
subtitle: The industry that facilitates the world's worst crimes
layout: post
---

<!-- 
how much money is made by money launderers?
acountants, lawyers, bankers, politicians, etc.
what are the economics of this industry? 
-->

<!-- I wrote this blog post because I believe that illicit finance is our greatest problem. 
Everywhere I look on the internet is awareness of climate change, inequality, war, ... etc.
However, I think, a necessary cause (one of many causes) of these issues is the illegal manipulation of numbers. 
And we should be paying more attention! -->


<!-- > Illicit financial flows are a form of illegal capital flight that occurs when money is illegally earned, transferred, or spent. [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illicit_financial_flows)

> Illicit financial flows refer to the movement of money across borders that is illegal in its source (e.g. corruption, smuggling), its transfer (e.g. tax evasion), or its use (e.g. terrorist financing). [imf](https://www.imf.org/en/About/Factsheets/Sheets/2023/Fight-against-illicit-financial-flows) -->

__What is money laundering and how does it do harm?__

Money laundering is the process of illegally concealing the origin of money obtained from illicit activities. (wiki)

Balance sheets, principal ownership, international transactions, ..., are abstract ideas. 
How does the manipulation of numbers cause harm in the real world?
Let's look at some examples:

- [kleptocrats](#kleptocrats)
- [illicit resource trade](#illicit-resource-trade)
- [arms trade and conflict financing](#arms-trade-and-conflict-financing)
- [lobbying and corruption](#lobbying-and-corruption)
- [tax evasion](#tax-evasion)
- [Monopolies and the Erosion of Trust](#monopolies-and-the-erosion-of-trust)

I list these examples, not because I am not particularly interested in Kleptocrats, the arms trade, illegal logging, or Russian oligarchs... Though we can probably agree they are bad.
Rather, I am interested in the industry that fascilitates them. 
How does it work? Who makes money? How do they do it?

Who are the people helping;

- a dictator profit from genocide?
- warlords purchase a mega-yatch with money earned through enslaving children?
- a corporation profit from the illegal destruction of the environment?

### Kleptocrats {#kleptocrats}

> Kleptocrat: "a ruler who uses their power to steal their country's resources."

<!-- #### The 1MDB Scandal

> The 1Malaysia Development Berhad scandal ... is an ongoing corruption, bribery and money laundering conspiracy in which the 1MDB fund was systematically embezzled. Although it began in 2009 in Malaysia, the scandal's global scope implicated institutions and individuals in politics, banking, and entertainment, and led to criminal investigations in a number of nations. The 1MDB scandal has been ... declared by the United States Department of Justice as the "largest kleptocracy case to date" in 2016.
A 2015 document leak reported in The Edge, Sarawak Report, and The Wall Street Journal showed that Malaysia's then-Prime Minister Najib Razak had channeled over RM 2.67 billion (about US$700 million) into his personal bank accounts from 1MDB, a government-run strategic development company. [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1Malaysia_Development_Berhad_scandal) -->

#### Viktor Yanukovych

Viktor Yanukovych and his associates, known as ‘the Family’, are believed to have embezzled as much as $37 billion (from Ukraine) during his time in office. The former president of Ukraine has been convicted in absentia of treason and is currently living in exile in Russia. [wiki](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Viktor_Yanukovych)

#### Nursultan Nazarbayev

Nursultan Nazarbayev, the former president of Kazakhstan, is believed to have amassed a multi-billion dollar fortune through corruption and misappropriation of state assets. Investigations revealed complex webs of shell companies and offshore accounts used to channel illicit funds, showcasing the sophisticated methods employed by high-level actors. (References: OCCRP, The Guardian)

<!-- ### Isabel dos Santos, Angola's "Richest Woman"

Despite her impoverished country's struggles, dos Santos amassed a multi-billion dollar fortune through alleged corruption and misappropriation of state assets. Investigations revealed complex webs of shell companies and offshore accounts used to channel illicit funds, showcasing the sophisticated methods employed by high-level actors. (References: DW, Bloomberg) -->

### Vladimir Putin

Vladimir Putin, and his associates, have used Gazprom, Russia's state-owned gas company, to amass vast wealth and consolidate power. The company has been accused of corruption, cronyism, and human rights abuses, with Putin's inner circle benefiting from lucrative contracts and kickbacks.

***

The result of this theft of public resources is that the people of these countries are left in poverty. They are unable to access basic services like healthcare, education, and infrastructure, while their leaders live in luxury and opulence. 
<!-- want stronger language here --> 
The impact of IFFs on developing countries is particularly severe, exacerbating inequality and hindering economic development.

For each of these Kleptocrats, there is an industry ready to help them move their money, hide their assets, and evade detection.

<!-- a better metaphor. stealing a hospital and converting it into their own private mansion. -->
<!-- stealing a school anbd then donating it back and being called a philanthopist -->

### Illicit Resource Trade {#illicit-resource-trade}

Profiting fom the exploitation of natural resources, often in conflict zones, is a common tactic used by warlords and corporations.

#### Illegal logging: Khmer Rouge

The Khmer Rouge regime (perpetrators of the 4th largest genocide) used illegal logging to fund their war. Investigations into the illicit timber trade revealed the complicity of corrupt officials. 
[Global Witness](https://www.globalwitness.org/en/archive/thai-khmer-rouge-links-and-illegal-trade-cambodias-timber/)

#### Blood diamonds

A main source of funing for the Revolutionary United Front (RUF - known for child soldiers and cutting off limbs) in Sierra Leone was the sale of diamonds. The RUF used the proceeds from the sale of these "blood diamonds" to finance its campaign, resulting in the deaths of thousands of civilians and the displacement of millions more. De Beers, the world's largest diamond company, has been accused of complicity in the trade of conflict diamonds. [Global Witness](https://www.globalwitness.org/en/campaigns/conflict-diamonds/)

#### Nigeria's OPL245 and Shell

Shell worked with corrupt officials in Nigeria to exploit the country's oil resources. The deal Shell engineered for one of Africa’s most promising oil blocks was set to deprive the people of Nigeria of an estimated $6 billion. [Global Witness](https://www.globalwitness.org/en/campaigns/oil-gas-and-mining/opl-245-shell-and-enis-nigeria-deal/)

***

Similar to Kleptocrats, the illegal exploitation of natural resources (aka resources owned by the public) for personal gain is a form of theft. It deprives the people of these countries of the benefits of their own resources, while enriching a select few. The environmental impact of these activities is also severe; climate change, deforestation, pollution, and loss of biodiversity.

### The Arms Trade and Conflict Financing {#arms-trade-and-conflict-financing}

Money laundering often fuels conflicts around the world. Investigations into arms dealers like Viktor Bout, nicknamed the "Merchant of Death," revealed complex networks used to circumvent sanctions and supply weapons to war zones, highlighting the human cost of IFFs. (References: UN Security Council, The New York Times)

And there are many more...

- Robert Mugabe and ? [ref]()
- Bashar al-Assad
- old ukranian pm  [ref]()
- 

### The Iraq war, Dick Cheney and Haliburton

<!-- military industrial complex -->

My understanding of the Iraq war is that a motivator of invasion was: Iraq had lots of oil. But this oil was exclusively for Iraq's nationalised oil industry. "A decade of war later, the oil fields are largely privatized and utterly dominated by foreign firms."

To be fair, there were other reasons for invasion as well. Saddam Hussein was overall a bad man. But there are many other bad people in power.

> Dick Cheney's old company Halliburton has profited from the mess in Iraq at the expense of American troops and taxpayers. While Halliburton has been engaging in massive overcharging and wasteful practices under this no-bid contract, Dick Cheney has continued to receive compensation from his former company. [ref](https://www.nytimes.com/2004/09/28/us/a-closer-look-at-cheney-and-halliburton.html)

(this isn't a good example? we know that Dick was recieving money. it didnt need to be laundered. it was just corruption that wasn't checked?! tho it is an example of money being used to buy things that shouldnt be purchaseable. )

Refs

- https://web.archive.org/web/20070426011102/http://oversight.house.gov/documents/20050916123931-74182.pdf

### Fraud

We have covered thiefs, now we turn to liars.


#### Enron


#### 2008 financial crisis?
<!-- 
Construct unstable / risky loans. Lie about them.
Lie to customers. Lie to investors. Run away with the money. -->


## How does it work?

<!-- Lawyers, bankers, accountants,  -->

Players

- The big 4 accounting consultancies: EY, PWC, Deloitte, KPMG. 
- Mossak Fonesca, ?
- ?

Customers are; thief, liars, murderers, ... But that doesn't do it justice. 
In my mind there is a big difference between;
- a thief that steals to survive and a theif who take 6 billion.
- a liar ...

### The Panama Papers

This massive leak exposed a global network of offshore accounts and shell companies used by wealthy individuals and businesses to hide assets and evade taxes. While not all cases involved illegal activity, the leak highlighted the systemic vulnerabilities that enable IFFs and the widespread impact on public finances. (References: ICIJ, The Guardian)

## Everything is for sale... even things that 'shouldn't' be for sale.

[What Money Can't Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/13221379-what-money-can-t-buy)

If you have enough money you can buy;

- diplomatic immunity,
- citizenship,
- legal ??? to cripple your competitors,
- more money. yes. you can buy more money... (steal with impunity?! evade taxes. purchase public resources for cheap etc) (almost always at the cost of others)
- 


## Money laundering

Money is useless if you can't spend it.
Would you accept money from Bashar al-Assad? 


## References

- [The definition of effective altruism](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1rQu75k8uMFpdsp1y3JWlHP6kev3T-97N/view)
- [Tax Havens and the case for Tax Justice](https://forum.effectivealtruism.org/posts/LMN6kLhdre9szBv5o/tax-havens-and-the-case-for-tax-justice)

Books

- [Kleptopia](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/45306313-kleptopia)
- [The Panama Papers](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/34507561-the-panama-papers)
- [Butler to the World](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/56756750-butler-to-the-world)
- [Very bad people](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/58951072-very-bad-people)

Other references

https://taxjustice.net/2023/02/01/tax-haven-mauritius/
- [The laundry library](https://thelaundrynews.com/the-laundry-library/)
- [Global Witness]()

<!-- Stops the ability to assign credit.
But why is this bad?
If the activity is illegal, then it may not be possible to trace the money back to the source. -->


<!-- would be good to survey the players on each side

for 'good';
(who are they and what are their tools?)
- IMF
- World Bank
- UN
- NGOs

for bad;
- Mossak Fonesca
- ???

 -->


 Tools to fight back.

 - Global Anti-Corruption (GAC) sanctions regime

 - UWO

 > The verdict was particularly galling for anti-corruption campaigners: UWOs were introduced to address both the lack of availability and the unreliability of evidence from kleptocracies, and yet in one of the first investigations, a UK High Court judge ruled that such evidence was admissible. The case appears to affirm the UK National Crime Agency’s own prediction that it is was very likely that “the oligarchy will have the financial means to ensure their lawyers – a key group of professional enablers – find ways to circumvent this legislation11.” It is little wonder that no UWO has apparently been issued since July 2019.

 https://ace.globalintegrity.org/kleptocracy-and-the-kazakhstan-crisis/

