---


---

<!-- the philosophy of statistics -->

What is stats for?

Summarising data with interpretable numbers.

Mean, median, mode.
Variance, standard deviation.


What if we use multiple points to summarise the data?

> Instead of a single central point, one can ask for multiple points such that the variation from these points is minimized.

Where k-means minimises the l2 norm, like how the arithmetic mean minimises the l2 norm.



<aside>

What is an average? What is it for?

How are means used?
- For making a prediction about the next data point. (average rainfall in november is 50mm. therefore it is likely to rain ~50mm this november)
- to compare. (the average rainfall in NZ is 100mm. the average rainfall in Aus is 50mm. therefore it rains more in Aus than NZ)
- to compress / simplify data. i have a variable interest rate that changes weekly. what is the equivalent fixed interest rate over the last 5 years? its the geometric average of the weekly interest rates. (no this is wrong. it ignores compounding.)
- 

what are the other ways to compress data into a single number?
- if we give up the requirement that the number is interpretable then ... ML...
- 

We have lots of data. We want to summarise it.
What does all this data tell us?

Imagine we want to answer the question; are people in NZ or Aus more wealthy?
One way to answer this question would be to pair up ...

When the maginitude is important.
Likelihood of rain (\< x ) is more pertinent than the average rainfall.

> a number that represents the most likely value from a probability distribution

We can summarise data with;
- a single number
- two numbers (mean and variance, gradient and intercept, )
- ???


There are a lot of cases where an average would be of little interest.
- What is the average frequency of a piano concerto?
- What is the average colour of a rainbow?
- ...


</aside>
