---
title: "Policies for a New Zealand Election 2026"
subtitle: "?"
categories:
    - politics
permalink: policies-2026
layout: post
---

Polcies I like;

- progressive tax (which caps out at a certain amount. 10000x poorest?)
- litigation and tax evasion finance
- move minimum votes per party to 2% (as this would give 1 MP)
- science funding. though i need to think about this more carefully. (how should that money be spent?)
- 

<!-- https://rethinkpriorities.org/research-area/disentangling-improving-institutional-decision-making/ -->


<!-- https://effectiveinstitutionsproject.org/ -->


I want to write a 3 part blog series on NZ politics.

# What is?

This should cover the current state of NZ politics. Every claim should be verifiable / have evidence.

### Poltics

- how well are peoples views and needs being represented by their representatives
- (lack of?) parliament budget funding for of public services / infrastructure; healthcare, pensions, water infrastructure, ... and  therefore they are in a state of decay (? evidence!)

### Corruption

- political affiliations / conflicts of interest of politicians (who is friends with whom, who used to work where, who has a conflit of interest in their current position, ...)
- corporate influence on politics

### Inequality

Current levels of inequality (and how they have been changing in the past).

Why inequality is bad: 
- the rule of law not applying equally to all, 
- economic power translates to political power, 
- ideas from the Spiritlevel (a book)
- amount of tax (aggregate) paid by middle class vs upper class

### Economy

How do you measure an economy?
At what rate are we producing novel ideas and commercialising them? (that's the job of an economy??)

lack of free market 
- eg tax breaks for film industry https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/577-million-support-film-and-tv-production
- a collection of misaligned incentives (for profit education - use income share agreement instead?, advertising revenue based on engegement - use conversion based bidding instead?, Government Procurement "Use It or Lose It", ...)

(I don't know much about this area. Also I dislike using GDP)

# What should be?

These are my opinions about what we should be aiming for. 

- equality of opportunity
- independent media watchdogs
- the rule of law (applies equally to all individuals)
- a free market, carefully regulated by a powerful, agile and socially+environmentally consious government.
- no individual needs more than $1 billion... (how is this set as inflation will reduce this value)
- basic needs should be provided for (noone should be hungry or homeless or without internet or ill or ...)

I want to maximise automomy. Give people access to more choices, more freedom in their lives.

(you might need to help me brainstorm - ask me a few questions)

# How to get there?

A mixture of speculation, best practices and evidence. Society, politics and economies are complex and we often don't have good evidence for interventions / the how. 

and specific policies that make sense to me (though, my opinions need to be checked here. in some cases there is a good understanding of how to achieve X)
- introduce BCI, 
- wealth tax / inheritance tax / progressive tax,
- litigation and tax evasion finance seem like good ideas to me?!
- progressive tax (which caps out at a certain amount)
- much more effort spend on catching tax evasion and money laundering
- Social Impact Bonds



As to the how. Well, I don't believe it a matter of (my, or your) opinion.

Obviously I have a few policies I like (such as ...), but I don't have a good understanding of the evidence for / against them.

Society is extremely complex, and it will take teams of hundreds of experts to sort through the data and find the (likely) best way forward (to achieve 'what should be').